Methodology & Evaluation

The music composition problem is closely related to language modeling that studies the connections among tokens in a sequence. This fits into a character level recurrent neural network (RNN) model. In the basic model, inputs are the notes at each time step, and for each step, there is a multi-layer network representing the hidden states. Hidden states are identical at each step which combines inputs and propagate to itself – the recurrent state. By doing this, the model combines information on a long sequence and builds a long term memory. However, the derivatives through a long sequence may have the problem of vanishing. To solve this problem, the long short term memory (LSTM) and gated recurrent unit (GRU) are typical solutions. In the music composition RNN model, there are 3 dimensions: 1) the time axis representing the sequence of notes being played; 2) the note dimension – there may be multiple channels in a music and multiple notes may be played together at one time step; 3) the hidden state dimension similar to typical RNN. With this structure, to maintain time invariant – the structure of network keeps the same at each time – is trivial. But the challenge is how to maintain the note invariant – to make the model being freely transpose the music. Johnson suggested a model called Biaxial-RNN which is similar to convolutional neural network which considers adjacent notes in the note dimension and applies 1D kernel when propagating the notes to the hidden state. This method indeed is reasonable, and we will investigate this model into details in this study. 

We choose a character based RNN using LSTM as our baseline model which is also the common method using deep learning for music composition. A couple of different model including the Biaxial-RNN will be compared with the baseline. The major metrics used to evaluate models is the predictability – given a sequence of music and predict the next time step. We also consider the ability of a model that compose better music. This evaluation is more subjective but more interesting. We found most previous studies focused on classic music which likely have more rule in composition. In this study we will trying to apply the models onto pop music to see if we can compose some reasonable sounds. 

